Now I'm going to add a second joint to the
robot that I've shown you before and this
robot is a little bit interesting in that
the end effector can reach any particular
point within an outer maximum circle described
by this, like an easily adaptive position
like this, like an adaptive position like
that. My two-degree of freedom robot can adapt
any x-y coordinate within the maximum circle.
With this two-degree of freedom robot, although
we can adapt any x-y coordinate within its
working space, it can’t adapt an arbitrary
orientation. So if the robot wants to be at
this particular xy coordinate, there is no
other orientation of this link of the robot
that's possible because orientation and position
are highly coupled.
Let's follow a similar procedure to determine
the pose of the end effector of these two-link
robot. I'm going to notate the robot and indicate
the length of its two links and indicate the
two joint angles. Next, we're going to rotate
out well coordinate frame by an amount Q1.
So a world reference frame now becomes this
grey coordinate frame shown here. Next I'm
going to translate that coordinate frame along
with the first link of the robot so now it's
here. We've applied now a transformation in
the x direction by the distance A1. Now I'm
going to rotate the frame by the amount Q2,
the coordinate frame now looks like this.
Finally, I'm going to translate it in the
x direction by the amount A2. This gives us
the coordinate frame attached to the end effector
of the robot, the end effector pose.
Now I can expand out this expression and multiply
together each of these matrices and the result
is this. Once again, we can look at the translational
path of this homogeneous transformation matrix.
These elements here pulling out, and now I
have an expression for the x and y coordinate
of the end effector of my two-link robot.
Once again we can see that the rotational
path of this transformation matrix which indicates
the orientation of the end effector is also
a function of Q1 and Q2. In fact it’s a
function of Q1+Q2. So once again, we can use
Q1 and Q2 to independently control x and y
but we can't independently control the orientation
of the end effector. If we use Q1 and Q2 to
choose x and y, then the orientation of the
end-effector is already determined and can
be independently chosen.
An interesting thing with a two-link manipulator
is that there are two joint angle configurations
that will put the end effector at a desired
position. Here is one configuration of the
robot, and here is an alternative configuration
of the robot that results in the same end
effector position.
For the two-link robot, I've already created
some works based variables to represent the
link lengths, that's the variables A1 and
A2 and to represent the two joint angles Q1
and Q2. And you can see their numeric values
over here. To determine the end effector pose
I need to chain together a number of elementary
homogeneous transformations so I am going
to have a rotation by Q1 followed by translation
and the x direction by A1 followed by a rotation
of Q2, followed by a translation in the x
direction by the length of link 2.
And I'm going to pass in the two joint angles,
Q1 and Q2. Here we have a homogeneous transformation
representing the pose of the end effector
of a two-link robot and the position of the
end effector is given by these two numbers
here and this 2X2 matrix here represents the
orientation of the end effector.
Now we can substitute these numeric values
by symbols so I defined symbol Q1 and Q2 and
symbols for A1 and A2. We can see in the workspace
now these things are symbolic objects as far
as MATLAB is concerned. And I can repeat this
trchain2 function and what I have now is a
symbolic representation of the pose of this
two-link robot manipulator.
I can import a model of a two-link manipulator
as the tool box of function mdl_planar2, and
creates a new object in the works based called
P2 which represents this robot manipulator.
What I can do is I can invoke the teach method
again and here we see a two-link robot manipulator
and I can adjust its joint angles and see
how it moves. Up here we have the x and y
coordinates of the robot end effector and
we see that that updates as I adjust the joint angles.
An interesting thing with the two-link manipulator
is that there are two sets of joint angles
which result in the same end effector position.
I'm going to use the plot method and I'm going
to move the robot to a configuration where
joint one has got an angle of zero and joint
2 has an angle of pi on two radians.
And here we see a robot in that particular
configuration. Now I'm going to plot it in
a different configuration, that angle is going
to be pi on two and this angle is going to
be minus pi on two.
What we see is that the robot end effector
has got exactly the same position. Robot has
a different configuration, the end effector
has got a different orientation but the position
is exactly the same.